Add tutorial (#421)
pester/docs: tutorial/5-working-with-files/2-testdrive.mdx

---
id: testdrive
title: Isolating files with TestDrive
description: Use Pester's TestDrive to give every test file a disposable filesystem that cleans itself up, then assert on the files your code actually wrote
---

Pester gives every test file its own temporary directory, cleans it up afterwards, and names it randomly so parallel runs cannot collide. It is called **TestDrive**, and it needs no setup at all — it is simply there.

## Two ways to reach it

- **`TestDrive:\`** — a PowerShell drive, for use with PowerShell commands.
- **`$TestDrive`** — the same location as a plain filesystem path.

Prefer `$TestDrive` with `Join-Path`. `TestDrive:\` only exists inside PowerShell, so the moment a path reaches a .NET method or an external executable it breaks — and `Export-PlanetReport` hands its path to `Set-Content`, which is fine, right up until someone changes it to `[System.IO.File]::WriteAllLines`.

## Testing the report

```powershell title="Planetarium/Public/Export-PlanetReport.Tests.ps1"
BeforeAll {

>     Import-Module $PSScriptRoot/../Planetarium.psd1 -Force

Author: ```suggestion
    Import-Module "$PSScriptRoot/../Planetarium.psd1" -Force
```

        Export-PlanetReport -Path $path
        Test-Path -Path $path | Should-BeTrue
    }

    It 'Writes one line per planet' {
        $path = Join-Path $TestDrive 'all.txt'

        Export-PlanetReport -Path $path

        (Get-Content -Path $path).Count | Should-Be 8
    }

    It 'Writes the name and the distance in astronomical units' {
        $path = Join-Path $TestDrive 'earth.txt'

        Export-PlanetReport -Path $path -Name 'Earth'

        Get-Content -Path $path | Should-Be 'Earth    1 AU'
    }

    It 'Throws when no planet matches' {
        $path = Join-Path $TestDrive 'nothing.txt'

        { Export-PlanetReport -Path $path -Name 'Pluto' } |
            Should-Throw -ExceptionMessage "No planets matched 'Pluto'."
    }
}
```

```powershell
Invoke-Pester -Path ./Planetarium/Public/Export-PlanetReport.Tests.ps1 -Output Detailed
```

```
Describing Export-PlanetReport
  [+] Creates the report file 45ms
  [+] Writes one line per planet 8ms
  [+] Writes the name and the distance in astronomical units 4ms
  [+] Throws when no planet matches 24ms
Tests completed in 362ms
Tests Passed: 4, Failed: 0, Skipped: 0, Inconclusive: 0, NotRun: 0
```

> Four real files were written and four are already gone. Check `git status` — nothing.

Author: Remove mentions of git, gitignore etc throughout? Not mandatory

The first test asserts the file is absent *before* the call as well as present after. Without that, a leftover file from an earlier run could make the test pass on its own.

## Scoping

TestDrive is not one directory for the whole run. The rules that matter day to day:

1. A clean drive is created **per test file**, at the first top-level `Describe` or `Context`.
2. Files made in a block are visible to everything nested inside it.
3. On leaving a block, files created *during* that block are removed.
4. When the file finishes, the whole drive goes.

> So each `It` above got the same drive but wrote a distinct filename. They could safely have reused one name — but distinct names make a failure easier to read, since the filename tells you which test wrote it.

Author: ```suggestion
Each `It` test above generated unique filenames but in the same folder. Once the last test in the `Describe` block was done, all four files were cleaned up.
```

:::warning Modifications to inherited files are not undone
Cleanup works by tracking which paths existed when a block was entered. Create a file in `Describe`, change it inside a `Context`, and the change survives after the `Context` ends — the file already existed, so it is excluded from that block's cleanup.

> The practical rule: create files in the block that uses them. Sharing a mutable file down the tree is how you get tests that pass alone and fail together, or that depend on execution order.

Author: ```suggestion
Create files in the block or test that needs it and avoid reuse when possible. You don't want test to depend on execution order, where one test might break another.
```

:::

## What this bought you

Compare against the alternatives from the previous page. No `AfterEach` to forget. No fixed paths to collide. No cleanup skipped because a test threw halfway. Nothing left behind when a test fails — and a failing test is precisely when stale files do the most damage.

> The parallel-safety is not theoretical either: the directory name is randomised specifically so several Pester processes can run at once, which is what your CI will do the moment the suite gets slow enough to shard.

Author: Rewrite, matching related note on previous page

<TutorialChecklist items={[
  {id: 'testdrive-basics', label: 'I know the difference between TestDrive:\\ and $TestDrive, and which to prefer'},
  {id: 'wrote-tests', label: 'I wrote the four Export-PlanetReport tests and they pass'},
  {id: 'no-debris', label: 'I confirmed the test run left no files behind in the repo'},
  {id: 'assert-existence', label: 'I know how to assert a file exists without a Should-Exist assertion'},
  {id: 'scoping', label: 'I can explain when TestDrive cleans up, and why modifications to inherited files survive'},
]} />

> Next module: finding out which parts of the module your tests never touch.

Author: ```suggestion
Next module: finding out which parts of the module you're not testing.
```
